The code assumes the user is using a GPU. We will update a more robust version with cpu ASAP.

## To Start
First, create and activate a conda environment:
```
conda create -n towertask python=3.10 -y
conda activate towertask
``` 

Then, to install the codebase in editable mode, run:  
```
pip install -e .
```
from the root directory (where `pyproject.toml` is located). This allows importing `towertask` and `VectorHaSH` from anywhere.

## Modify directories for saving results and data
Please modify the following in `src/towertask/config.py` to appropriate directories to save your results and data (e.g., models, activation vectors, other task-relevant stats).
By default, they save under `TowerTask/icml-results` and `TowerTask/icml-data`:

```
FIGURE_DIR = str(REPO_ROOT / "icml-results")
DATA_DIR = str(REPO_ROOT / "icml-data")
```

## Running Jobs on a Cluster

The submission scripts (e.g., in `submit_jobs/`) assume you're using a cluster environment with Slurm and Conda.

By default, they attempt to source Conda using the OpenMind-specific path:

```
source /cm/shared/openmind/anaconda/3-2022.05/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
```
⚠️ Update this line in the scripts if you're not on OpenMind. **Replace it with the path to your own conda.sh**, such as:

```
source ~/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
```

or, if using Anaconda:

```
source ~/anaconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh
```

## 📜 Reproducing All Model Variants from the ICML Paper
The script `submit_jobs/submit_all_models.sh` contains all job commands required to reproduce every model variant discussed in our ICML paper, including:
* main models (M1–M5),
* control variants (e.g., M0, M0+),
* appendix ablations and those added or discussed during rebuttal (e.g., CA3 recurrence, matching parameter counts).

To run all models, with learning rate tuning, simply do:

```
bash submit_jobs/submit_all_models.sh
```

Note: This script will launch multiple Slurm jobs across learning rates and seeds for all main models and control variants (M0-M5), which is not necessary in most user cases. **Please modify the script as needed before launching.**

Alternatively, you may launch `train.py` directly by referring to the commands listed in `submit_jobs/submit_all_models.sh`. For example, to launch M5, run
```
python3 train.py --reset_data --grid_assignment position position position --Np 800 --with_mlp --mlp_input_type sensory --new_model --seed $SEED --learning_rate $lr
```
with changes to $SEED and $lr.

## 🏞️ Reproducing All Figures from the ICML Paper
### analysis/
Post model training and testing (which saves .mat files of activation vectors and other stats), you may reproduce figures shown in the original paper with the corresponding files:
* `plot_fig2.py`: code for plotting learning metrics (e.g., success rate and steps taken per episode (environment configuration) over time), with the same format as Fig 2.
    * Fig 2: performance metrics.
* `plot_data_mat.py`: code for plotting place cell representation and computing mutual info from Nieh et al., using .mat file generated by `test.py`.
    * Fig 3, 7: activation heatmap in ExY space.
    * Fig 4, 8: place and evidence field in hippocampus.
    * Fig 11, 12: both activation heatmap and place/evidence field for variants with CA3 recurrence.
    * Fig 6: mutual info scatterplot.
* `non_linear_reduction.py`: code for plotting PCA of hippocampal vectors and RNN vectors.
    * Fig 5, 9, 10: First 2 to 3 PCs visuzlied to various variables and scree plots.

## Further Documentation
### root
* `train.py` & `test.py`: rl training/testing on tower task using VectorHsSH (or VectorHaSH+). `test.py` only works with M1-M5, which saves a .mat file for grid cells, place cells, and RNN hidden states representations, as well as other relevant task readouts. The .mat file works with `analysis/` to reproduce figures. Note that `train.py` also calls relevant functions from `test.py` in the end to save a .mat file for M1-M5.

### src/towertask
* `data.py`: data generation for simulating tower task.
* `model.py`: model definition with a simple RNN, as well as functions `select_action()` and `finish_episode()`.
* `utils.py`: helper functions including visualizations.
* `env.py`: reinforcement learning environment for executing the tower task using RNN defined in `model.py`.

### src/VectorHaSH
* This folder contains all the code related to VectorHaSH (and VectorHaSH+). Essentially, *_wrapper.py contains environments that wrap around the `TowerTaskEnv` created in `src/towertask/env.py`.

## Citation
```
@inproceedings{xie2025multi,
  title={A Multi-Region Brain Model to Elucidate the Role of Hippocampus in Spatially Embedded Decision-Making},
  author={Yi Xie and Jaedong Hwang and Carlos D. Brody and David W. Tank and Ila R. Fiete},
  booktitle={Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)},
  year={2025},
  url={https://openreview.net/forum?id=sTc83mG2H9}
}
```

